# [ATS3-Xanadu](http://www.ats-lang.org/)/xassets

This directory primarily contains some pre-built "assets" (e.g.,
compilers with accompanying files). One can use such assets, for
instance, to turn ATS3 source code into a form (such as JS code, PY
code, etc.) that can be interpreted or executed. Mostly, the
assets stored here are for the purpose of developing ATS3. For
someone who is interested in using ATS3 as a programming language,
please visit XATSHOME.

## XATS2JS

For compiling ATS3 into JS.

### JS/xats2js/xats2js_jsemit00_ats2_opt1.js

This compiler is built for bootstrapping ATS3. It can be run with
node21 or a later version. Using an earlier version of node to run the
compiler may work as well.  The word `jsemit00` in the name of the
compiler indicates that the compiler emits JS code after loading (via
a call to the function `the_tr12env_pvsl00d` in `xglobal.dats`) some
prelude-files (inside srcgen2/prelude) specifically made for
bootstrapping.  The word `ats2` in the name indicates that the
compiler is built via the direct use of another ATS3 compiler written
in ATS2.  Also, the word `opt1` in the name indicates that the JS code
for the compiler is generated by the closure-compiler (produced by
Google), which is a JS-to-JS compiler.

### JS/xats2js/xats2js_jsemit00_ats3_opt1.js

This compiler is built as the result of a successful bootstrapping of
ATS3. The word `ats3` in the name indicates that the compiler is built
via the use of some ATS3 compiler written in ATS3 itself. For
instance, this compiler can compile its own source code, that is,
bootstrap itself. If we refer the first ATS3 compiler as
ATS3-compiler_ats1 (whose source is written ATS2), and the previous
compiler as ATS3-compiler_ats2, and this one as ATS3-compiler_ats3.
Then we have the following informative equations:

```
(
Assume ATS2-compiler is available
)
ATS3-compiler_ats1 = ATS2-compiler.compile(ATS3-source_ats2)
ATS3-compiler_ats2 = ATS3-compiler_ats1.compile(ATS3-source_ats3)
ATS3-compiler_ats3 = ATS3-compiler_ats2.compile(ATS3-source_ats3)
ATS3-compiler_ats3 = ATS3-compiler_ats3.compile(ATS3-source_ats3)
```

It is due to the last equation that ATS3-compiler_ats3 is claimed to
be able to bootstrap itself. In this particular case, we say that ATS3
can be bootstrapped via JS since ATS3-compiler_ats3 is a program in JS.

(
ATS3 can be bootstrapped via Python (PY) as well, though bootstapping
ATS3 via JS is much more efficient.)

### JS/xats2js/xats2js_jsemit01_ats3_opt1.js

The word `jsemit01` in the name of the compiler indicates that the
compiler emits JS code after loading (via a call to the function
`the_tr12env_pvsl01d` in `xglobal.dats`) some prelude-files (inside
XATSHOME/prelude) made for general-purpose programming.

Basically, `jsemit00` is for developing ATS3 (e.g., compiler-related
development), and `jsemit01` is for general-purpose programming. This
one (jsemit01) is also stored at XATSHOME.

## XATS2PY

For compiling ATS3 into Python3.

### JS/xats2py/xats2py_pyemit01_ats3_opt1.js

This compiler is built for compiling ATS3 source into PY.  It needs to
be run with Python3.12 (or a later version).  The word `pyemit01` in
the name of the compiler indicates that the compiler emits PY code
after loading (via a call to the function `the_tr12env_pvsl01d` in
`xglobal.dats`) some prelude-files (inside XATSHOME/prelude) made for
general-purpose programming.  The word `ats3` in the name indicates
that this compiler is built via the direct use of a bootstrapped ATS3
compiler. Also, the word `opt1` in the name indicates that the JS code
for the compiler is generated by the closure-compiler (produced by
Google).

This one (pyemit01) is also stored at XATSHOME.
