# [ATS3-Xanadu](http://www.ats-lang.org/)/xassets

This directory primarily contains some pre-built compilers with
accompanying files that one can use to turn ATS3 source code into a
form (such as JS code, PY code, etc.) that can be interpreted or
executed.

## XATS2JS

For compiling ATS3 into JS.

### JS/xats2js/xats2js_jsemit00_ats2_opt1.js

This compiler is built for bootstrapping ATS3. It can be run with
node21 or a later version. Using an earlier version of node to run the
compiler may work as well.  The word `jsemit00` in the name of the
compiler indicates that the compiler emits JS code after loading (via
a call to the function `the_tr12env_pvsl00d` in `xglobal.dats`) some
prelude-files specifically made for bootstrapping.  The word `ats2` in
the name indicates that the compiler is built via the direct use of
another ATS3 compiler written in ATS2.  Also, the word `opt1` in the
name indicates that the JS code for the compiler is generated by the
closure-compiler (produced by Google), which is a JS-to-JS compiler.

## XATS2PY

For compiling ATS3 into Python3.

### JS/xats2py/xats2py_pyemit01_ats3_opt1.js

This compiler is built for compiling ATS3 source into PY.  It needs to
be run with Python3.12 (or a later version).  The word `pyemit01` in
the name of the compiler indicates that the compiler emits PY code
after loading (via a call to the function `the_tr12env_pvsl01d` in
`xglobal.dats`) some prelude-files made for general-purpose
programming. The word `ats3` in the name indicates that this compiler
is built via the direct use of a bootstrapped ATS3 compiler. Also, the
word `opt1` in the name indicates that the JS code for the compiler is
generated by the closure-compiler (produced by Google).
